---
layout: post
title: Xenomai Installation
---

Xenomai is a real-time OS using Linux as a background task. Linux is preempted as a simple task. With Xenomai, the idea of impossible preemption, handlers, is no longer valid. Tasks, handled by Xenomai, are guaranteed to have a hard real-time execution.

But running two Operating Systems has its load of issues. First you need two schedulers, which leads to issues again : how to share the hardware, how to make Xenomai's and Linux's tasks interact with each other.

As beginers ourselves, we will try to popularize what we can fetch from challenging tutorials and technical data about Xenomai.

## Requirements :

For the rest of the tutorial I will assume your relative path ( i.e. `~/` ) is `home/me`. "me" being the name of the user for your machine.

Create a working directory in which you will do everything. Let's call it RTOS :

`$ mkdir rtos`

The Linux kernel from distributions such as Ubuntu being modified and somewhat polluted, you will need a fresh vanilla version of the Linux kernel here :
`https://www.kernel.org/`. Extract your Linux tarball in your working directory.

We will now start working with Xenomai :

```
$ cd ~/rtos
$ git clone git://git.xenomai.org/xenomai-3.git
```

Once the repository is cloned, make sure to bootstrap the autoconf system in the top-level directory (/home/me/rtos/xenomai-3). In order to do this, you will need the GNU autotools installed on your workstation.

```
$ apt install libncurses5 libncurses5-dev build-essential kernel-package fakeroot libssl-dev
$ ./scripts/bootstrap
```

You also need the interrupt pipeline (aka I-pipe) patch to apply against the kernel tree. The patch is already in the Xenomai package, but more recent ones can be available [here](https://xenomai.org/downloads/ipipe/) This parameter can be omitted if the I-pipe has already been patched in, or the script shall suggest an appropriate one.

Move the patch to `~/rtos`

## Cobalt kernel

The first step is to build it as part of the target kernel ( being your vanilla linux ). The Xenomai 3 team already prepared a script to complete this step properly :

```
$ scripts/prepare-kernel.sh --linux=../linux-4.4.219 --ipipe=../ipipe-core-4.4.218-cip44-x86-23.patch --arch=x86_64`
Hunk #3 succeeded at 83 (offset -1 lines).
Hunk #4 succeeded at 96 (offset -3 lines).
Hunk #5 succeeded at 685 (offset -17 lines).
Hunk #6 succeeded at 912 (offset -17 lines).
checking file arch/x86/entry/common.c
...
...
...
checking file lib/bust_spinlocks.c
checking file lib/dump_stack.c
checking file lib/ioremap.c
checking file lib/smp_processor_id.c
checking file mm/memory.c
checking file mm/mlock.c
checking file mm/mmap.c
Hunk #2 succeeded at 2827 (offset -12 lines).
checking file mm/mmu_context.c
checking file mm/mprotect.c
checking file mm/vmalloc.c
```

You should not get any `Hunk ...` messages. It means the patch was moved to be applied correctly. If you look at my kernel version and my patch version, they differ by 0.0.1. Ideally you will use the same version for both.

You can now start configurating your Xenomai kernel :

```
$ cd ~/rtos/linux-4.4.219
$ make menuconfig
```

Build and install :

`$ make -j8 && make -j8 modules_install install`

Without modifying the configuration of modules, the kernel couldn't build. The visorbus driver had some issues with defines in the include folder. Because the module was unnecessary to our end we simply deactivated the driver in the configuration of the kernel. It then built without issues.

We can now install the Xenomai libraries.

```
$ cd ~/rtos/xenomai-3
$ ./configure && make && make install
```

Don't forget to update grub so that it parses the kernel available on your computer and adds it to the list at bootloading stage.

```
sudo update-grub
```

I wouldn't recommand putting Xenomai as the default grub option because... I did. And it was painful to come back from that.

References:
[StackOverflow (March 2017). "Installation Steps for Xenomai 3 on Ubuntu 16.04"](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/41949678/installation-steps-for-xenomai-3-on-ubuntu-16-04)
[David Chabal (Febuary 2012). "Premiers pas avec Xenomai"](https://dchabal.developpez.com/tutoriels/linux/xenomai/)
[Xenomai's Maintainers (2019). "Installing Xenomai 3"](https://gitlab.denx.de/Xenomai/xenomai/-/wikis/Installing_Xenomai_3)